# How to build a PC

Obviously to build a Gaming PC, you need to choose computer parts. This can be tricky and can result in a faulty computer if the parts aren’t chosen correctly. But don’t worry, we will help you with choosing your parts and where to buy them from. But before we do that, we need to understand how different components work and integrate with each other.
Let’s think of the computer as a human’s body. We humans have a body that holds our brain, eyes, and other different organs, each serving a different purpose that contributes to the final goal, which is surviving. I like to think of computers similarly, so you can think of the motherboard as the body. That’s because it’s where all the other components are connected and communicate together through. Motherboards come in many different sizes: mini-itx, micro-atx, ATX. The 3 different sizes offer different features depending on your needs, and it’s obvious that ATX provides the most features as it’s the biggest. We will discuss those features in detail later, but you need to make sure that your motherboard at least has the following: enough USB ports, enough fan headers, enough RGB headers, 4 RAM slots, VRM and chipset cooling. 
Enough USB ports are solely based on your needs, but make sure you have at least 5. That’s for your mouse, keyboard, headphones, speakers, and a spare one. Actually, USB ports aren’t that simple! There are different generations of USB ports with drastically different speeds, to the point where some peripherals need to be connected to newer generations to fully function. Make sure your motherboard at least has two USB3.2 connections (USB3.2 is faster than USB2.0).
As for the RGB and FAN headers, that can be determined later based on the number of Fans and RGB you’re installing. Headers are basically pins on the motherboard, that provide power to whatever it’s connected to.
Having 4 RAM slots is really important, mainly for future proofing when upgrading your RAM. What’s more important than the RAM slots themselves, is the number of RAM sticks you will install. You should always start with 2 RAM sticks for the best performance (this is called dual channel memory). Always check your motherboard’s manual on where to install your RAM sticks, but it’s usually one slot apart. Installing RAM in Dual Channel will have a significant improve in performance.
VRM and chipset cooling is crucial if you’re looking to overclock your components, otherwise you may experience crashes and the “blue screen of death”. The VRM basically converts the high voltage from the Power Supply to lower voltage that is supplied to the components. Having a heatsink prevents the VRM from overheating, hence having a more stable overclocking experience. 
Now that we have discussed what to focus on when buying a motherboard, let’s move on to other components. The brain has short-term and long-term memory, and so does the motherboard. The short-term memory in the motherboard is called RAM, and it holds all the current and ongoing commands and applications in the computer temporarily. It’s pretty obvious that running more applications requires more RAM, but there are some standards for how much you should get. For gaming, you really don’t need more than 16Gb of RAM. As mentioned above, remember to get two 8Gb sticks instead of one 16Gb stick for better performance. We will discuss RAM speed later with the CPU.
But what if we need to store applications and data permanently? This is where the motherboard’s long-term memory comes in. There are two main types of long-term computer memory:                   the HDD (Hard Disk Drive) and SSD (Solid State Drive), each one has its own pros and cons. The main difference being that SSDs are much faster compared to HDDs, however they can’t store large amount of data for a long time like HDDs (HDDs have better longevity). That’s why you shouldn’t pick one over another, but use them both together. You should install windows -will be explained later- onto the SSD for fast boot times and a responsive OS. Word Documents, photos, and videos should be stored on a HDD, as they won’t benefit from faster loading times. When it comes to games…installing them on a SSD or HDD won’t have a significant effect on performance, however you will experience longer loading times on a HDD. 

Now we have reached the brain of the computer, the CPU. Knowing how the CPU works is not needed to build a gaming PC, but if you’re interested, check out these sources (Wikipedia – RedHat). Choosing the right CPU is quiet the tricky task, as every other component choice is based on what CPU you choose. To make things easy, check the illustration below…and everything will be explained after.

Obviously, since AMD and Intel have different CPU’s, they connect differently onto their motherboards. AMD CPUs have pins on them, and connect to AM4 motherboards. Intel CPUs have pins on the motherboard, and connect to LGA1200 motherboards (older Intel CPUs will use different motherboards). When it comes to RAM speeds, AMD CPUs benefit from much higher speeds, 3600mhz or higher. Intel CPUs will be alright with 3200mhz or lower.
CPU cooling is also really important, especially if you plan on overclocking. You can cool your CPU using Air or Water Cooling. If your CPU’s Idle temperature is 60C or higher, you’re in a serious problem. So always aim to keep the temps below that. We will suggest different Air/Water coolers in the next Article.

Finally, gamers’ most important part…the graphics card. Good news is, choosing a graphics card is quite simple! The more you pay, the better performance you get. However, you need to keep in mind some other factors like: how good your monitor is and what CPU you are using. You should always aim for a balanced system, and not spend all the budget on the graphics card. If you get a top-end GPU and ignore the CPU, you may suffer bottle-necking and lose on FPS and performance. 
If your monitor is lower than 144hz, there is no point in getting a RTX3090, as you won’t be able to benefit from the extra performance. Unless you plan on Ultra-High settings gaming.

We already have an article discussing Power Supplies in detail. Check it out by clicking on (here).
We also have another article discussing PC cases in detail. Check it out by clicking on (here).

Hopefully, now we know how the computer’s components work and rely on each other; in the next article, we will discuss the names of the best computer parts and where to buy them from…so stay tuned!
